It's time to talk
about z/OS components.
Now, covering z/OS
is a tricky task.
There's really
no single entry point,
and there is no point you can hit
that marks the end
of your education.
So just as we're trying to
avoid leaving anything
important out,
we're very much trying to avoid
covering the same topics twice.
But sometimes when
you hear something
stated after you've learned
more about the parts around it,
or even just phrased
slightly differently,
it can really help
to connect the dots.
So we're going to
cover some stuff here
we've already talked
about before,
but we're going to
be covering them in
a slightly different context
which I think will
help you better
understand in the long run.
First off, there's RACF.
Now, we talked about RACF that's
responsible for
granting access to
system resources only to
those who are supposed
to have access.
In addition to determining
who gets in and who doesn't,
it also logs information
about access attempts,
and holds information
about users,
groups, resources, and profiles.
What's really important
about it is that it
has direct connections
to a lot of
other major subsystems
like OMVS, CICS, and TSO.
Without that tight integration,
RACF wouldn't be so powerful,
fast, and flexible.
DFSMS is the suite of products
related to data storage
and management.
It helps automate and
centralize the management
of storage based on
the policies defined
for your installation.
Those policies can be
based around performance,
security, space, and
resource availability.
The heart of DFSMS is the
storage management subsystem,
that's the SMS in DFSMS,
the DF standing
for data facility.
SMS defines the policies
that automate
the management of storage
and hardware devices.
So you can say this type
of data should
always go on the fastest
storage devices we have,
or this type of data needs to get
backed up to tape at
the end of each day.
Then when you
allocate new storage,
you define it into one of
those storage classes.
You still need someone acting as
a storage administrator
to make all this happen.
It doesn't just magically
make it happen all by itself,
but it provides
the tools that makes
automating this incredibly
complex environment possible.
Next up, communications server,
or just comm server.
This supports peer-to-peer
connectivity functions
for local and wide area networks,
including the widest network
of them all, the Internet.
Whenever z/OS needs to talk
to something over a network,
comm server gets involved.
SMP/E, short for system
modification program extended is
the z/OS tool for
managing the installation
of software products
on a z/OS system,
as well as tracking
modifications to these products.
That second part is incredibly
important because if
we've installed something
and didn't keep track of it,
or we think we have something
installed that's
not really there,
or it's at the wrong version,
that could spell out disaster.
All the installed
software modifications
are kept track of in
the consolidated software
inventory, or CSI.
You can interface with SMP/E
through jobs you submit,
or through the dialogues in ISPF.
But no matter what
method you use,
it's important that
what's on the system
matches what SMP/E
thinks is on the system.
Another facility, SMF.
This is the system
management facility,
and it records system and
job related information
in the CICS1.MANXX datasets.
This information is
useful in determining
billing information,
analyzing the configuration,
determining when to
schedule batch jobs,
evaluating dataset activity,
and auditing a system security.
SMF data collection
is executed by
several specific
routines spread all
over z/OS and other products.
The data can go into the system
or specific job-related records.
So you've heard about SMF,
now get ready for RMF.
RMF, the resource
management facility,
and that's there to ensure the
system is running smoothly.
It gathers performance data
using three types of monitors.
There's monitor 1 which
gathers long-term data,
monitor 2 which handles
snapshot moment in time data,
and monitor 3 that
collects short-term data.
This data is used by all sorts of
mainframe professionals
including SysProgs,
service administrators,
and performance analysts.
If something is being pushed too
hard or it's going underutilized,
that'll show up in an RMF report.
We might use
the information we got
from RMF to make adjustments
in another component called
the workload manager or WLM.
The way WLM works is basically
by setting up a series
of understandings
between the user
and the operating system.
You start with classes and
a class could be high priority,
medium priority,
normal, best effort.
It describes how imperative that
work is to our business goals.
All the work we want
to be managed with
WLM goes into one
of those classes.
Next, we defined goals
where we set requirements.
Maybe we've got an application
that needs to complete
95 percent of its transactions
in 20 milliseconds or less.
We set those goals and we
let WLM determine where
incoming work should go and how
it should be handled. Even better,
because WLM operates at
the sysplex level,
it can automatically and quickly
route work to
the most appropriate LPAR.
By defining our goals and letting
WLM manage the incoming work,
we get much greater control and
consistency of business results
in our environment.
All in a day's work for
your favorite enterprise server.